the last two weeks were intense to say
the least not only did the US elect a
new president but the very next day the
German government collapsed so let's
talk about what happened and what that
means for
[Music]
[Applause]
Germany hello sa and welcome back to my
YouTube channel my name is phy I'm
originally from Munich Germany but I've
been living here in Cincinnati Ohio on
and off since 2016 and before we dive
into the topic I have a quick
announcement for any of you who are
wanting to learn German or Spanish or
another language because I actually
teamed up with Babel to get you an
amazing Black Friday deal Babel is one
of the top language learning apps in the
world that'll get you to start speaking
in just three short weeks you can easily
practice real world conversations like
this one about expressing your
opinion that's definitely something
you'll need if you ever wanted to talk
about political topics like these in
German but also of course when talking
about your favorite movie or your
thoughts on the new restaurant or out
the corner or you can check out these
Hands-On lessons about how to greet your
neighbor how to say goodbye to your
German teacher or how to order
coffee I really like that bab lessons
are created by hundreds of language
experts so that you can learn practic
IAL realistic conversations like these
from day one and in addition to the
regular lessons Babel also offers live
online classes and podcasts that you can
listen to all throughout your day and if
it's not the right fit after all no
worries Babel Has a 20-day money back
guarantee and will get you a full refund
since it's almost Black Friday you can
now get 60% off with my link in the info
box below or if you just scan this QR
code so don't miss out and secure 60%
off during Babel's Black Friday sale so
you may have seen headlines like these
in the last few days and asked yourself
what exactly does that mean I received
quite a lot of messages from you guys
asking if I could shed some light on
this so let's do it first of all what
happened
exactly on November 6th so the day after
the US election the federal government
of Germany got together to discuss the
budget for the upcoming year and
particularly to find a way to close a
billion EUR Gap in the budget but they
didn't come to an agreement Chancellor
Olaf Schultz and his Social Democratic
party the SPD wanted to take on more
debt than initially planned and use the
extra money to boost Germany's
struggling economy by lowering Energy
prices and offering investment
incentives they also wanted to send
additional support to Ukraine but the
Finance Minister Christian lintner Who
belongs to the libertarian party fdp
blocked this saying that it would
violate Germany's constitutional debt
break the schen B and he disagreed with
SCH who said that there would be a legal
workaround for this now after just
finding out that Donald Trump was coming
back into office there was certainly a
lot of pressure on the German government
that day economy experts have projected
that Trump's tariffs would further
increase inflation all over the world
and for Germany particularly it's
estimated that this will cost the
country roughly
127 billion over the next four years and
it's due to Trump's approach to the war
in Ukraine that the government felt like
it would be especially important at this
time to provide extra support for that
region but instead of sticking together
during these uncertain times something
must have happened on November 6th
Because by the end of the day Chancellor
Olaf Schultz decided to put his foot
down once and for all and fired Finance
Minister Christian lintner SCH explained
his decision by
saying he stated that lintner has
repeatedly betrayed his confidence and
wasn't willing to find compromises to
make decisions for the entire country
but instead got hung up on Party
politics and kept blocking negotiations
Linda on the other hand accused schz of
unnecessarily staging his dismissal
instead of ending the government
Coalition on mutual terms and said that
Schultz is leading Germany into a phase
of uncertainty now technically firing a
minister doesn't automatically mean the
whole government falls apart in theory
schz could have just appointed someone
new but in this case this wasn't just
just a disagreement between Schultz and
Lindner but the result of continuous
disputes between the three governing
parties that have been building up for a
while so at the end it wasn't just
Lindner who left the government but his
entire party the fdp left with him
including Justice Minister maku Bushman
and education Minister patina Shak vatsa
The Only Exception was the transport
Minister fising who instead of leaving
the government chose to leave the fdp
and stay in the government as an
independent politician for now so
ultimately the fdp withdrawing from the
government means that the current
government Coalition is collapsing and
as a result of this there will be a snap
election in February but to fully
understand why that's the case we need
to talk about how the political system
works in
Germany unlike the US which has what's
called a presidential system Germany is
set up as a parliamentary system which
means that the German government isn't
elected by the citizens but by the
parliament which is called bundestag in
German it's kind of what the House of
Representatives is here in the US so as
German citizens we vote for the parties
we want represented in the Parliament
and because we use proportional
representation we don't only have two
parties sitting in the parliament as is
the case here in the US but usually
about seven to eight different political
parties that fill up the seats according
to the percentage of votes they get from
the population if you want to know more
about how the drma parliament elections
work in detail I actually made a video
about that back in 2021 during the last
election I'll link that up here for you
but for now all we need to know is that
the citizens vote for which parties they
want in the Parliament and at which
ratio and the Parliament then elects the
chancellor who is the head of government
or you could also say the head of the
executive branch in other countries this
position is also sometimes called the
Prime Minister like in the UK and in the
US of course the head of government is
the president but he also has some
functions beyond that so his role is a
little bigger than that of a Chancellor
or prime minister but let's go back to
Germany so in order to elect a
Chancellor the bigger parties each
nominate a candidate and to win they
will need an absolute majority so over
50% of the votes within the parliament
now naturally every party is going to
vote for their own candidate so unless
one party has more than 50% of the seats
which hasn't happened since 1957 none of
the candidates will get an absolute
majority the solution to this issue is
that two or more parties team up with
each other in order to accumulate the
necessary votes and form the government
together which is called a coalition so
right after the parliament election
results are in the different parties
enter negotiations with each other and
see who they'd be willing to work with
and which compromises would need to be
made some of the parties are a little
bit more flexible with who they could
collaborate with based on their
political orientation others are more
limited but there's typically more than
one possible option for Coalition these
negotiations can take weeks or sometimes
even months that's what happened after
the election in 2017 during Mack's last
term where it took them almost half a
year to finally form a government during
the negotiations they usually talk about
which party the chancellor will come
from typically it's the party with the
most votes which party gets which
Ministries and they try to find some
common ground in regards to topics that
the parties might have different
standpoints on then they sign a
coalition agreement and the bundist
officially elects the chancellor and now
the parties that are part of the
Coalition all vote for the same
candidate of course then the chancellor
and the ministers are officially
appointed by the bundas president the
president who is officially our head of
state but takes on a mostly
representative function kind of like the
British king in the past we've had a
coalition of CDU which is the Christian
conservative party and SPD the social
democrats for example that was the case
during maa's last term or we've had a
coalition of SPD and the Green Party CDU
and fdp and so on and since 2021 we've
had a coalition of three parties SPD the
green party and the fdp and because of
their party colors this Coalition has
commonly been referred to as the traffic
light
coalitional or but with the fdp actually
being a little more on the center right
side of the political Spectrum at least
in terms of their economic views and the
SPD and green party more on the center
left side there were a lot of
disagreements in this Coalition from the
very beginning which is why they've
gained a pretty bad reputation for
publicly fighting with each other
instead of presenting themselves as a
team so with that going on for over 3
years now did it come as a big surpris
that the Coalition finally collapsed
definitely not but I don't think anyone
really expected it to happen on a random
Wednesday even the green party who is
part of the Coalition didn't seem to see
it coming and they even said in their
statement afterwards that they
considered it a preventable
step now what is all of the mean for
Germany moving forward what happens
next for now Olaf schz is still our
Chancellor and the government is still
in office the SPD and the green party
have replaced the three ministers who
belong to the fdp with people from their
own parties and they're now what's
called a minority government since
without the fdp they don't actually have
an absolute majority in the bundis talk
anymore which will make it extremely
hard to pass any policies that's why
this is only a temporary resolution and
Olaf schz already announced that he will
hold a vote of confidence in the
bundestag in German we call this fat
frag and it's something that the
chancellor can do whenever they're not
sure if their government is still
supported by the parliament either to
stabilize the political situation and
create a new sense of legitimacy or to
initiate a snap election that's what's
going on in this case because SCH is
expecting to lose the vote of confidence
which then allows him to ask the
president to dissolve the Bund ATT
within 21 days and request new elections
which will have to take place within 60
days of that the last time a German
chancellor asked for a vote of
confidence was in 2005 by the way when
Chancellor Gad Shuda won at early
elections and ended up losing against
angila makaka who as you probably know
went on to be our Chancellor for a whole
16 years now technically schz doesn't
have to dissolve the parliament even if
he does lose the vote of confidence
because it's totally legal and possible
to govern as a minority government we
just recently had a minority government
on the state level in Thia for example
and they might actually end up with
another one for the next four years but
especially on the federal level it's not
very practical long term and as a
politician who wants the best for their
country it wouldn't really make a whole
lot of sense to cling to that the vote
of confidence can also be done the other
way around by the way which is then
called a constructivist mist or in
English constructive vote of no
confidence so in that case the
parliament initiates the vote vot and
has the option to elect a new Chancellor
if they want now ever since schz fired
Lindner there have been a lot of
discussions in Germany about the
timeline of all of this schz initially
suggested to do the vote of confidence
in January and then have the elections
in March he wanted to make sure that
some of the bills that the government
has been working on could still get
passed before the end of the year with
the support of some of the opposition
parties especially the budget needs to
be figured out but in response some of
the people from the opposition accused
him of linging on to his position as
Chancellor and requested for the
elections to take place earlier but then
again there were City administrations
who voiced their concerns and said that
it's not possible for them to organize
an election that quickly because that
requires a lot of logistics that they
hadn't planned for and a lot of the
political parties asked for a little
more time to nominate their candidates
and prepare to campaign especially with
the holidays coming up particularly
smaller parties who aren't already
represented in the bundist OR in one of
the state parliaments are struggling
because they need to collect thousands
of signatures first to even be on the
ballot and those parties don't typically
have any full-time staff but rely on
volunteers but after a lot of back and
forth the big parties have finally found
a compromise and announced this past
Tuesday that the vote of confidence will
now take place on December 16th and the
snap election will take place on
February 23rd now how is this upcoming
election going to change the political
landscape in Germany who's running for a
Chancellor and which party is projected
to get the most
votes first of all the next election in
Germany was scheduled for September of
2025 anyway so some of the preparations
had already started in the background
and the political changes were most
likely going to come either way it's
just happening half a year early now
currently the polls look like this of
course this can still change by February
but as of right now it looks like the
party with the most votes about 33% will
be the CDU CSU which is a union of two
parties the Christian Democratic party
and the Christian social party the CSU
can only be elected in the state of
Bavaria while the CDU can be elected in
the other 15 states it's kind of
complicated but on the federal level
they usually work together and are often
just referred to as the unun the union
so every time I mentioned the CDU
earlier in this video I actually meant
both of them this is the party that Anga
was in and they're considered one of the
big folks pan in Germany people's
parties they can be described as center
right or Christian conservative on the
political Spectrum their Chancellor
candidate this time is fredri matat
who's considered one of the more
conservative politicians within the
party and the way it looks right now he
will most likely become Germany's Next
Chancellor the second strongest party on
here with 177% of the votes is the afd
which is a far-right party that's been
gaining a lot of support in Germany over
the last few years even though they were
only founded in 2013 in the state
election in Thia this past September
they actually received the majority of
the votes which marked the first time
since World War II that a far right
party won a German election yet since no
other party was willing to form a
coalition with them it doesn't look like
they'll end up in the state government
there which still hasn't been formed as
of right now the afd is known for being
anti-immigration and wanting to leave
the European Union among other things
and afd stands for alternative forut so
alternative for Germany they're
definitely the most polarizing and
controversial party in the parliament
right now in the states of Thia Saxony
and Zony anhad the domestic intelligence
agencies have even classified the afd as
confirmed right-wing extremist if you
want to learn more about the party I'll
link an English-speaking documentary
about them in the info box below their
candidate for Chancellor will be Alis V
even though I should say that so far
we've only ever had chancellors from the
SBD or the Union in the history of the
Federal Republic of Germany which brings
me to the third strongest force in these
polls which is schutz's Party The Social
Democratic SPD they've traditionally
been considered the other big people's
party besides the union but as we can
see in the numbers they've definitely
lost some of that support recently
they're considered to be Center left on
the political spectrum and as of right
now we don't officially know yet who
their candidate will be it'll either be
Olaf Schulz again or there has also been
some talk about the current defense
minister Boris pistorio being a better
option he said he didn't want to run but
I guess we'll see then we have the green
party with a projected 11% of the votes
they can also be described as Center
left similar to the SBD with one of
their main focuses being the environment
even though ever since they were founded
in the 1980s they've become an
established party with a broad party
program that goes beyond just
environmental topics their Chancellor
candidate for the upcoming election will
be current economy Minister and vice
Chancellor robet havic then we have
brand new party in this poll showing up
with 5% the BSW buness Zar vagen or
zarag Alliance this party was actually
just founded earlier this year by a
politician who used to be a prominent
member of the left party Dinka so she
was already a representative in the
bundestag as a member of the left party
but then decided to split off and found
her own party and several other
Representatives actually decided to go
with her which is why they currently
have 10 BS party members sitting in
Parliament even though the party didn't
even exist during the last elections
generally the BSW is considered to be
even further left than the left party
and has also been described as a
left-wing populist or nationalist the
left party itself only shows up with 3%
on this poll they're actually a
descendant of the SED party that ruled
in former East Germany and unless they
win at least three direct candidates in
the election they might not actually
make it into the parliament at all this
time because they would need at least
five % for that but I explained all the
details of that in my election video and
last but not least there is the fdp
which you've already heard so much about
today they're officially called the free
Democratic party and they're kind of
similar to what you would call
libertarian in the US except that
they're more Progressive in regards to
social issues but they're a very
business focused party that advocates
for a free market on the political
Spectrum they're usually considered
center right and if they only get 4% as
this poll suggests they might not make
it back into the parliament either this
upcoming election so since the last
elections in September of 2021 where the
SPD was the strongest party there have
definitely been a lot of changes one
issue for forming a coalition this time
could be that almost none of the other
parties are willing to collaborate with
the afd because of a fundamental
difference in core values which might
make forming a coalition a little tricky
again but we'll see how it turns out in
February so in summary the German
government coalition collaps the day
after the US election when the
chancellor fired the Finance Minister
which led one of the three governing
parties to withdraw from the government
Coalition as a result Germany will have
an early election in February instead of
the planned election in September which
will result in new federal Parliament
and will most likely also have a new
Chancellor since SCH hasn't even
officially been nominated yet and even
if he does run he would have pretty slim
chances of winning so the next
chancellor of Germany will most likely
be Fred m from the Christian
conservative CDU one thing that a lot of
Germans aren't super excited about is
that politics Will now probably play a
pretty big role over the holidays and if
the next election after this one takes
place according to the regular schedule
it will take place in February again but
we'll see what happens I hope I could
clear up some of your questions about
the political situation in Germany if
you have any follow-up questions feel
free to put them in the comments below
and maybe I or someone else can help
answer them don't forget to check out
babbles Black Friday sale and get your
60% off with the link down below and if
you enjoy my channel and what I do on
here please consider subscribing liking
the video or even sending me a super
thanks that's the best way to support
all the work that goes into this or you
could even become a supporter on patreon
or send me a coffee on kofi.com either
way thank you guys so much for watching
and I hope I'll see you next time cheers
[Music]
oh